# Logic Programming and Related Concepts

- **monotonic logic**: _Additional knowledge never invalides a previous conclusion._
  - If $m \vdash t$ and $m' \supset m$ then also $m' \vdash t$.
- **non-monotonic logic**: _Additional knowledge might invalidate previous conclusions._
  - **abductive** reasoning; causality: _Deriving a sufficient explanation of the known facts._
    - if "A best explains B" and "B" then "likely A".
    - but if "C also explains B" and "C" then "likely A" is no longer required. 
  - **knowledge** reasoning: _lack of knowledge about something becomes invalid in the presence of knowledge about X._
    - If $m \vdash \sim\!x$ then $m \cup x \not\vdash \sim\!x$.
  - **belief revision**: _A new belief might be inconsistent with the old ones._
    - If $a, b \vdash \bot$ and $a \in \beta$ then $\beta' = (\beta \setminus a) \cup b$ 
  - **closed world** If "A" then there is a proof of "A" (_completeness_)
    - If $a$ then $\vdash a$.
    - If $\sim\!a$ then $\neg a$ _ie_ "$\sim$" means "there is no proof of". 
  - **circumscription** _Things are as expected unless otherwise specified._
  - **autoepistemic** _Representation and reasoning of knowledge about knowledge,_ uses a modal operator _eg_ "$\Box p$" to express "$p$ is known".
  - **default** _Formalize reasoning with default assumptions,_ based on the following _rule schema_ where $\mathbf{B}$ denotes "believe":
    - If we _believe_ $a$ and the justifications $b_1, \ldots b_n$ are _consistent_ (with our beliefs) then we can also believe $c$:
    $$
    \frac{\mathbf{B} a : b_1 \cdots b_n}{\mathbf{B} c}
    $$
  - **proof theoretic** formalization: non-monotonic inference rules + contexts of application.
  - **model theoretic** formalization: restricted semantics _then_ derived inference rules + possible contexts.
- **clauses**
  - **disjunctive:** $a_1 \vee \ldots \vee a_n$ where each $a_i$ is a literal.
  - **horn** or **definite:** a disjunctive clause with, at most, one positive literal: $a \vee \neg b_1 \vee  \ldots \vee \neg b_n$ or, in _implication form,_ $a \leftarrow b_1 \wedge  \ldots \wedge b_n$.
    - **fact:** $a$
    - **goal:** $\bot  \vee \neg b_1 \vee  \ldots \vee \neg b_n$ or $\bot \leftarrow b_1 \wedge  \ldots \wedge b_n$
- **herbrand**
  - herbrand **universe**:
     - of a _language_: the set of all _ground terms_ of that language.
       - extended with an arbitrary constant if none exists.
     - of a _closed formula_: as above, restricted to the symbols of the formula.
  - herbrand **structure**: an universe + interpretation of the constants and functional symbols.
  - herbrand **base**: structure + interpretation of relation symbols.
- **well-founded semantics** is three-valued.
- **completion semantics** based on completing a program.
- **autoepistemic semantics** "$\sim$" is the _modal operator_ such that "$\sim\! p$" means "_$p$ is unknown_" or "_$p$ can't be proved_".
- **stable model semantics** 
    - Based on the _autoespistemic_ and _default_ semantics:
        - "$\sim p$" means "no proof of $p$".  
        - A _default_ can be used to derive its conclusion under the assumption that its justifications are consistent with what is currently known.
            - "$s \leftarrow p \wedge \sim\!q$" means that we derive $s$ if (i) we know $p$ and (2) (the justification) $\neg q$ is consistent.
- **negation as failure** or **weak negation** is _non-monotonic_